that crackling sound is actually the
vaporization of water and when that
happens basically ruptures the oil film
and since oil drop is flying everywhere
so you'll see if you remove the pan
you'll get a nice ring of oil droplets
and some of them hit your arm and
normally you're cursing the necklace
because it's actually quite painful
after this explosion they're often water
droplets in the oil droplets in the air
and then they'll sometimes explode too
so you get these beautiful Jets like
just midair yeah it's really I mean is
gorgeous we wanted to understand exactly
what was going on in that process so we
just have a mini frying pan which is a
baton and I had a minyan plate or steel
plate about that big and it has a little
well that we put the oil in and we just
let that heat up and we measure the
temperature with a thermocouple so we
know exactly what the temperature is so
it's not just low medium or high we know
exactly what the oil temperature really
is and then we film it with the
high-speed camera and do the aerosol
size illusions when these droplets fly
out you get some of the ones that hit
your skin body millimetric in size but
it's the other stuff but you don't see
and you don't feel what you think is
potentially hazardous of having to
endure anything less than two and a half
microns the sizes were scorable go down
to the lower branches of the lungs some
of these are down to the sub marketers
that they're hundreds of nanometers in
size as a smallest we've been able to
measure yeah so they can be suspended in
the air for weeks
I guess our advice would be to use the
ventilation if you have it and clean the
filters as well
- about five years ago we came across
this toy that's a deformable elastic
sphere that we started skipping on the
water surface just like stones and we
observe some really interesting
phenomenon including this notion that
the sphere skips really really close to
each other at the end of its of its
travel and so we looked more into the
details of what's going on there and we
stumbled upon this water walking
mechanism water walking is this newly
observed skipping state that we saw
where rather than skipping in a manner
like a skipping stone the sphere
actually starts to rotate very quickly
it holds a deformed shape and then it
hits rapidly across the water surface
and if you see it it really gives this
impression that it's walking across the
world water surface like the basilisk
lizard
we have dug in into the mathematics and
the mechanics behind why this phenomenon
occurs and it turns out it's a natural
naturally occurring state that the ball
wants to be in if it's rotated fast
enough we went out to a place where one
could study this bear lake and we had
people in the water with high speed
cameras looking at what was happening
150 feet down range I wish I could work
every day like this actually wake up
early watch the Sun rise over a
beautiful lake work in a lovely lake and
then pack up by 2 o'clock and go home
and rest the experiment that I'm looking
at is the emergence of small skills and
vortex ring collisions so if you've
never seen someone Louis smoke-ring I'm
looking at the exact same flow structure
except I take these two vortex Springs
and I fire them head-on into each other
and when they do that they expand
radially and then just rapidly break
down into this turbulent cloud of smoke
understanding turbulence is important
because we live in turbulence so we were
very interested in the system because
you have these nice bordered laminar
flow structures that rapidly break down
into fine scale turbulence we were able
to show through some of our experiments
by imaging the collision of these two
vortex rings locally in three dimensions
that we were actually able to see vortex
cores they do flatten into very thin
vortex sheets which then break down into
two secondary vortex filaments which
themselves we have observed break down
into even smaller tertiary filaments and
we're really working on probing the
and measuring how these small filaments
emerge from large filaments in this
mechanistic perspective and try to
compare it with the theoretical model if
we can get a better understanding of how
this occurs we can have a better grip on
how these turbulent flows are
interacting with everyday life because
we won't we don't live in a vacuum you
know now I had a great Spring Break last
year in Phoenix Arizona and we saw a
great video there of these women in
Vanuatu that make music by interacting
with the water by slapping and moving
their hands through it and then inspired
us to study this sound they make is a
lot like a drum set so they have a way
of making like a snare drum and a bass
drum and a cymbal
for instance the snare drum is just
slapping your hand on the surface and
pulling it back up and then a bass drum
is when you plunge your hand all the way
underwater and there's that collapsing
event so our experiment is a lot more
calculated perhaps and like dry but we
essentially you know have a high-speed
camera there and hydrophone and a
microphone and we slap the surface or
plunge in the surface and then record
that but it's not nearly as exciting as
watching these women do it it's a
possibility you can communicate
underwater this way from the surface
it's maybe a way that you could call
your kids back if they were smart
like that you know slap slap plunge plow
it being like cherry you know get home
now I'm sweet
[Music]